Concept - Prompt Engineering (#40462)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/conceptual/prompt-engineering-in-dot-net.md

Reviewer: Drop "in" from the file name, per https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/help/platform/seo-optimize-urls?branch=main#name-your-files. Also dotnet should be one word.

<img width="451" alt="image" src="https://github.com/dotnet/docs/assets/24882762/0a72950a-71cd-49fe-b71c-393319d12bd5">

Reviewer 2: Thanks! I can't open that link though...

GPT models from OpenAI are prompt-based: they respond to user input text (a prompt) with the most likely series of words to follow (a completion). The basic completion in earlier GPT models is text generated in response to prompts, producing a more free-form interaction. Newer GPT models produce chat completions that use a specific format, with messages based on roles (system, user, assistant) and chat history to preserve conversations.

Consider this text generation example where prompt is the user input and completion is the model ouput:

Prompt:
**"The president who served the shortest term was "**

Completion:
_"Pedro Lascurain."_

Looks right, but what if your app is supposed to help US History students? Pedro Lascurain's 45-minute term is the shortest term for any president, but he served Mexico&mdash;the students are probably looking for _"William Henry Harrsion."_ Clearly, the app could be more helpful to its intended users if you gave it some context.

That's the basic idea of prompt engineering: you add context to the prompt to help the model produce better completions. You can do this by giving the model instructions, examples and cues.

## Instructions

> This section explains the use of instructions in prompt engineering.

Reviewer 2: I would love to ditch those "This section..." sentences! They are from the concepts template PDF we got early on. I find them clunky, not clarifying. I'm going to suggest it to Sloan and Jesse.

An instruction is text that tells the model how to respond. An instruction can be a directive (**"You are helping students learn about US history, so talk about the US unless they specifically ask about other countries."**) or an imperative (**"Translate to Tagalog:"**).

Directives are more flexible than imperatives:

- A directive can provide more context than an imperative.
- You can combine several directives in one instruction.
- It's usually better to implement a series of steps using a sequence of directives. If you tell the model to output the result of each step, when a problem arises you can easily see which step caused it. Although you can tell the model exactly what steps to follow, you can also just tell the model to break the instruction into steps itself, and tthen to output the result of each step. This approach is called [chain of thought prompting](chain-of-thought-prompting.md).

> Instructions are typically more effective when used with examples. However, when you use both in a prompt you should make sure that the instructions are either above or below the examples for best model performance.

Reviewer 2: Me too! I'll revise once I understand better. The idea was don't interleave them because you might confuse the model. But there's also other material that says things at the top and bottom of a prompt get more attention from the model than things in the middle, so perhaps the idea here is that instructions require more attention than examples?

Make sure you clearly separate primary content from the instructions that apply to it, such as by labeling it. Consider the following C# example.

```csharp
prompt= @$"Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments.
Accomplishments: 'George Washington
First president of the United States.
First president to have been a military veteran.
First president to be elected to a second term in office.
First president to receive votes from every presidential elector in an election.
First president to fill the entire body of the United States federal judges; including the Supreme Court.
First president to be declared an honorary citizen of a foreign country, and an honorary citizen of France.
John Adams ...'" //Text truncated;
```

### Supporting content

Supporting content is text that the model processes as part of an instruction, but which isn't the subject of the instruction. The instruction must refer to the supporting content. As with primary content, supporting content should be clearly distinct from the instruction it supports.

> Suppose you use the instruction **"Summarize US Presidential accomplishments"** to produce a list. The model might organized and order it in any number of ways. But what if you want the list to group the accomplishments by a specific set of categories? You could adjust your instruction by appending **"&nbsp;grouped by category"** to it, but a model is unlikely to correctly determine which specific categories you want.

Reviewer 2: I had a bunch of similar suggestions and revised accordingly.

To make sure the model uses the categories you want, you could append supporting content to specify your categories and adjust your instruction accordingly. You could add a line of supporting content below the instruction and then change the instruction so it refers to the supporting content:

```csharp
prompt = @$"Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.
Categories: Domestic Policy, US Economy, Foreign Affairs, Space Exploration.
Accomplishments: George Washington
First president of the United States.
First president to have been a military veteran.
First president to be elected to a second term in office.
First president to receive votes from every presidential elector in an election.
First president to fill the entire body of the United States federal judges; including the Supreme Court.
First president to be declared an honorary citizen of a foreign country, and an honorary citizen of France.
John Adams ..."; //Text truncated
```

> ## Examples

Reviewer 3: Again, here I'd choose a header that makes it clear you mean examples in your prompt, not examples for the reader to try.

This section explains the use of examples in .NET prompt engineering.

> An example is text that shows the model how to respond by providing sample user input and model output. The model uses examples to infer what to include in completions. Examples can come either before or after the instructions in an engineered prompt, but the two shouldn't be interspersed.

Reviewer 3: Clarifying not to intersperse the examples worked well.

```csharp
prompt = @$"Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.
Categories: Domestic Policy, US Economy, Foreign Affairs, Space Exploration.
Accomplishments: George Washington
First president of the United States.
First president to have been a military veteran.
First president to be elected to a second term in office.
First president to receive votes from every presidential elector in an election.
First president to fill the entire body of the United States federal judges; including the Supreme Court.
First president to be declared an honorary citizen of a foreign country, and an honorary citizen of France.
John Adams ...  // Text truncated

> // Cues

Reviewer 3: Are the `//` comments meant to be part of the prompt? As written, they will be.

Reviewer 2: thanks, I revised!

## .NET implementations

This section compares two .NET options for prompt engineering: [Semantic Kernel](/semantic-kernel/overview/) and [Azure OpenAI](/azure/ai-services/openai/overview).

### Semantic Kernel

Semantic Kernel is an SDK that integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) with conventional programming languages such as C#, Python, and Java. Semantic Kernel lets you define plugins and easily chain them together in just a few lines of code. You can use [Semantic Kernel planners](/semantic-kernel/agents/planners/?tabs=Csharp) to automatically orchestrate plugins, which lets you ask an LLM to generate a plan that Semantic Kernel can execute to achieve a user's unique goal.

By deeply integrating with Visual Studio Code, Semantic Kernel also makes it easy for you to integrate [prompt engineering](/semantic-kernel/prompts/your-first-prompt?tabs=Csharp) into your existing development processes:

- Create prompts directly in your preferred code editor.
- Write tests for your prompts using your existing testing frameworks.
- Deploy your prompts to production using your existing CI/CD pipelines.

> SK Completions use GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 models, which have no specific format rules for prompts. The preceding sections all contain examples of SK Completions.

Reviewer 3: Is "SK" a common abbreviation? If so, you should use it in parentheses when you first introduce "Semantic Kernel (SK)". If we prefer customers to use the full words, we should use them in this article.

Reviewer 2: Thanks - I will spell it out for now - I have no idea what we prefer customers to do yet.

SK Chat Completions use GPT-35-Turbo and GPT-4 models, which use a specific chat-like format consisting of role-based messages as shown in the following example.

> ```csharp
> prompt = @$"<message role=""system"">You are helping students with US History homework. Answers should not be about other countries except in relation to the US. Provide some supporting information for answers. Format any summaries using lists.</message>
> <message role=""user"">Which president had the shortest term?<message/>
> <message role=""assistant"">William Henry Harrison died just 31 days after his inauguration as president in 1841, making his presidency the shortest in U.S. history.<message/>
> <message role=""user"">Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category. Categories: Domestic Policy, US Economy, Foreign Affairs, Space Exploration, Other.</message>";
> ```

Reviewer 3: Here, raw string literals will look much cleaner:

```suggestion
```csharp
prompt = """
<message role="system">
    You are helping students with US History homework. Answers should not be about other countries except in 
    relation to the US. Provide some supporting information for answers. Format any summaries using lists.
</message>
<message role="user">Which president had the shortest term?<message/>
<message role="assistant">
    William Henry Harrison died just 31 days after his inauguration as president in 1841,
    making his presidency the shortest in U.S. history.
<message/>
<message role="user">
    Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.
    Categories: Domestic Policy, US Economy, Foreign Affairs, Space Exploration, Other.
</message>
""";
```
```

---
title: "Prompt Engineering"
description: "Learn basic prompt engineering concepts for .NET."
author: catbutler
ms.topic: concept-article #Don't change.
ms.date: 04/10/2024

#customer intent: As a .NET developer, I want to understand prompt engineering techniques for .NET so that I can build more efficient and targeted AI apps.

---

# Prompt engineering in .NET

This article covers GPT prompt engineering for .NET, including Semantic Kernel and Azure OpenAI.

GPT models from OpenAI are prompt-based: they respond to user input text (a prompt) with the most likely series of words to follow (a completion). The completion format in earlier GPT models is text generated in response to a prompt, producing a more free-form interaction. Newer GPT models produce a chat completion in message form, with messages based on roles (system, user, assistant) and chat history to preserve conversations.

Consider this text generation example where *prompt* is the user input and *completion* is the model output:

Prompt:
**"The president who served the shortest term was "**

Completion:
_"Pedro Lascurain."_

> Looks right, but what if your app is supposed to help US History students? Pedro Lascurain's 45-minute term is the shortest term for any president, but he served Mexico&mdash;the students are probably looking for _"William Henry Harrsion."_ Clearly, the app could be more helpful to its intended users if you gave it some context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looks right, but what if your app is supposed to help U.S. history students? Pedro Lascurain's 45-minute term is the shortest term for any president, but he served Mexico&mdash;the students are probably looking for _"William Henry Harrsion."_ Clearly, the app could be more helpful to its intended users if you gave it some context.
```

> That's the basic idea of prompt engineering: you add context to the prompt to help the model produce better completions. You can do this by giving the model [*instructions*](#use-instructions-to-tell-the-model-what-to-do), [*examples*](#examples-show-the-model-what-to-do) and [*cues*](#cues).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's the basic idea of prompt engineering: you add context to the prompt to help the model produce better completions. You can do this by giving the model [*instructions*](#use-instructions-to-tell-the-model-what-to-do), [*examples*](#examples-show-the-model-what-to-do), and [*cues*](#cues).
```

- [System messages](/azure/ai-services/openai/concepts/advanced-prompt-engineering?pivots=programming-language-chat-completions#system-message) give the model instructions about the assistant. A prompt can have only one system message, and it must be the first message.
- User messages show example or historical prompts, or contain instructions for the assistant. An example chat completion must have at least one user message.
- Assistant messages show example or historical completions, and must contain a response to the preceding user message. Assistant messages aren't required, but if you include one it must be paired with a user message to form an example.

> [!NOTE]
> In Semantic Kernel, you can help keep your prompts flexible and lean by [using variables for input parameters](/semantic-kernel/prompts/templatizing-prompts?tabs=Csharp#adding-variables-to-the-prompt) and [calling nested functions](/semantic-kernel/prompts/calling-nested-functions?tabs=Csharp#calling-a-nested-function).

> ## Use Instructions to tell the model what to do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use instructions to tell the model what to do
```

This section explains the use of instructions in prompt engineering.

An instruction is text that tells the model how to respond. An instruction can be a directive or an imperative:

> - _Directives_ tell the model how to behave, but aren't simple commands&mdash;think character setup for an improv actor:  **"You are helping students learn about U.S. history, so talk about the U.S. unless they specifically ask about other countries."**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _Directives_ tell the model how to behave, but aren't simple commands&mdash;think character setup for an improv actor: **"You're helping students learn about U.S. history, so talk about the U.S. unless they specifically ask about other countries."**
```

- _Imperatives_ are unambiguous commands for the model to follow. **"Translate to Tagalog:"**

> Because they are open-ended, directives are more flexible than imperatives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because they're open-ended, directives are more flexible than imperatives:
```

*Supporting content* is text that you refer to in an instruction, but which isn't the target of the instruction. The model uses the supporting content to complete the instruction, which means that supporting content also appears in completions, typically as some kind of structure (such as in headings or column labels).

Use labels with your instructional content to help the model figure out how to use it with the instruction. Don't worry too much about precision&mdash;labels don't have to match instructions exactly because the model will handle things like word form and capitalization.

Suppose you use the instruction **"Summarize US Presidential accomplishments"** to produce a list. The model might organize and order it in any number of ways. But what if you want the list to group the accomplishments by a specific set of categories? You can adjust your instruction by appending **"&nbsp;grouped by category"** to it, but a model won't know which specific categories you want. Use supporting content to add that information to the instruction.

> Adjust your instruction so the model will group by category, and append supporting content that specifies those categories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adjust your instruction so the model groups by category, and append supporting content that specifies those categories:
```

```csharp
prompt = """
Instructions: Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.
Categories: Domestic Policy, US Economy, Foreign Affairs, Space Exploration.
Accomplishments: George Washington
First president of the United States.
First president to have been a military veteran.
First president to be elected to a second term in office.
First president to receive votes from every presidential elector in an election.
First president to fill the entire body of the United States federal judges; including the Supreme Court.
First president to be declared an honorary citizen of a foreign country, and an honorary citizen of France.
John Adams ...  /// Text truncated

DOMESTIC POLICY
- George Washington: 
- John Adams:
""";
```

- **DOMESTIC POLICY** shows the model that you want it to start each group with the category in all caps.
- **- George Washington:** shows the model to start each section with George Washington's accomplishments listed on one line.
- **- John Adams:** shows the model that it should list remaining presidents in chronological order.

## .NET implementations

> This section compares two .NET options for prompt engineering: [Semantic Kernel](/semantic-kernel/overview/) and [Azure OpenAI](/azure/ai-services/openai/overview).

Reviewer: I don't think Semantic Kernel and Azure OpenAI should link to other pages here, if anything, I'd expect these to link to the sections below. But then you can add those links off to other pages in the sections themselves.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! revised

Azure OpenAI Completions use GPT-3 and GPT-35 models, which have no specific format rules for prompts.

```csharp
Prompts =
{
    "Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.",
    "Categories: domestic policy, judicial appointments, trade agreements, space exploration", 
}
```

Azure OpenAI Chat Completions use GPT-35-Turbo and GPT-4 models, which use a specific chat-like format consisting of role-based messages.

```csharp
Messages =
{
    // The system message represents instructions or other guidance about how the assistant should behave
    new ChatRequestSystemMessage("You are helping students of US History with their homework. Be cheerful about it."),
    // User messages represent current or historical input from the end user
    new ChatRequestUserMessage("I need help with my homework."),
    // Assistant messages represent historical responses from the assistant
    new ChatRequestAssistantMessage("Of course! That's what I'm here for. How can I help?"),
    new ChatRequestUserMessage("Summarize US Presidential accomplishments, grouped by category.\\n Categories: domestic policy, judicial appointments, trade agreements, space exploration"),
}
```

> ## Extending the reach of your prompt engineering techniques

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Extend the reach of your prompt engineering techniques
```

> You can also increase the power of your prompts with two more advanced prompt engineering techniques that we'll cover in depth in their own articles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also increase the power of your prompts with two more advanced prompt engineering techniques that are covered in depth in their own articles.
```

Reviewer: Style guide says to avoid using "us" and "we".

> - LLMs have token input limits that constrain the amount of text you can fit in a prompt. You can use *embeddings* and *vector database solutions* to reduce the amount of tokens you need to represent a given piece of text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- LLMs have token input limits that constrain the amount of text you can fit in a prompt. You can use *embeddings* and *vector database solutions* to reduce the number of tokens you need to represent a given piece of text.
```
